Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Daniel
Williams. He's a lecturer in philosophy at the University
of Sussex. And today we're going to talk about
the science of misinformation specifically. We're going to talk
about some criticisms that that Doctor Williams says of
the science of misinformation and how it's conducted based
on some of his substack posts. So, Doctor Williams,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to everyone.
Thanks for the invitation.
So perhaps let's start with the definition just for
people to understand what we're talking about here. So,
um, when you tackle the science of misinformation, what
are you referring to exactly? What, what is the
science of misinformation?
It's difficult to be too exact, is what I'd
say. Um, OF course, if you understand misinformation extremely
broadly as any factors responsible for distorting human judgment
or leading individuals to form misperceptions, and if you
understand science extremely broadly as. Any systematic investigation of
a phenomenon, you could say misinformation studies goes back
thousands of years. You can think of Plato and
Aristotle as engaged in a certain kind of research
into misinformation. You could also think of all of
the great sort of social theorists, so Marx, Weber,
Durkheim, and so on, as interested in the science
of misinformation in some sense. And of course, the
emergence of social psychology in the 20th century. The,
the, the mid-twentieth century, research on things like stereotypes,
on prejudice, on the way that social identification bias
is judgment, etc. ETC. ALL of these projects in
some way are concerned with understanding misinformation in a
sort of systematic manner. But when I'm focusing on
misinformation studies in most of my writings on this
topic, I'm really focusing on something which is much
narrower than that. And it's a sort of multidisciplinary
body of scientific research that really rose to prominence
round about 2016, and we can maybe return to
why that was a sort of important year. And
it's concerned with establishing scientific generalizations, often sort of
sweeping scientific generalizations about misinformation as a construct. So
that includes things like estimating the prevalence of misinformation,
often to sort of several decimal places. Um, ESTIMATING
the, the quote unquote fingerprints of misinformation, the idea
that misinformation is associated with the use of emotional
language, um, estimating which parts of the political spectrum
misinformation is more prevalent within, different groups, susceptibility to
misinformation, and also the sort of impact of interventions
against misinformation. So these sort of broad, relatively sweeping
generalizations about misinformation. Um, AND as a, a project,
although that didn't start in 2016, it really, I
think, rose to prominence in 2016. And I think
many of the sort of pro problems and pitfalls
of the discipline, as I see it, is to
some significant degree, a sort of post 2016 phenomenon.
But it is really important just to add another
bit of context, which is that. You know, like
any body of research, misinformation research is incredibly complex
and diverse, and there's lots of variation in the
sort of quality and sophistication of research within it.
So probably in the course of our conversation, I'll
cite some research within that field that I think
is really kind of excellent and and high quality.
At the same time, I also think there's some
research which sort of lacks those intellectual virtues as
well. So, you know, I don't want to generalize
too much. Often when I talk about misinformation research.
It would be impossible for me to claim that
the, the characterizations that I'm making apply to every
single study within the field. But I do think
as well there are some sort of foundational conceptual,
methodological, philosophical questions, like, for example, what even is
misinformation, like what are we talking about when it
comes to that concept that arise as an issue
for most of the, the, the research that occurs
within that field.
So tell us then about 2016. Why was it
that in 2016 was the year when the misinformation
studies you focus mostly on uh rose?
I think there were two big events in 2016
that took many people, especially sort of the expert
class, you know, commentators and and pundits and journalists
and social scientists by surprise. One of these was
the United Kingdom's vote to, to leave the European
Union, um, Brexit, and the other was the election
of Donald Trump in the United States, or the
first election of Donald Trump in the United States.
Events which were sort of viewed as indicative of
this more general sort of populist backlash throughout many
parts of the world. This sort of angry rejection
of quote unquote elites and quote unquote, the establishment,
where that, at least in the case of many
of these movements, includes what you might think of
as sort of epistemic elites. So social scientists, members
of public health authorities, um, individuals within mainstream media,
and so on and so forth. And part of
the reason why misinformation as a phenomenon becomes such
an intense sort of um topic of, of focus
during that time is because these movements are viewed
by many as being associated with a, a large
amount of false and misleading content. But also there's
this kind of narrative that emerges in the aftermath
of these events and this sort of broader populist
backlash that they're indicative of, which is that they're
driven by, they're in some sense rooted in a
recent explosion of kind of false and misleading information,
which is manipulating a sort of half gullible, half
deplorable public. And this comes from. Algorithmic manipulation, it
comes from, according to this narrative, you know, foreign
influence campaigns from Russia, but also from sort of
domestic demagogues. And that's why, according to this narrative,
there's been this sort of increase in support for
these movements, which many people within what you might
think of broadly as, again, quote unquote, the establishment,
which many people within that area sort of rejected
and felt, felt surprised by. Um, um, SO you've
got that kind of narrative frame, which is that
a driving force behind these movements is misinformation, and
that's found among, you know, members of government, intergovernmental
organizations, among social scientists, among journalists, and also among
members of the general public. So if you look
at survey data over the past sort of 8
years or so, um, many, many people are incredibly
worried about misinformation, and many ordinary citizens also view
misinformation as this sort of great societal threat. And
then that then leads to uh uh uh uh
an intensification of research on misinformation within the social
sciences. And all of that then increases dramatically once
you get to 2019, 2020, and the COVID-19 pandemic,
where again you get this kind of framework, which
many people find attractive for understanding why it is
that people reject public health advice and reject expert
judgments during the pandemic, which is that it's rooted
in, it's driven by misinformation. So famously in 2020,
you've got the World Health Organization. That declares, like
amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, that there's also this worldwide
infodemic, which is characterized by this kind of explosion
of false and misleading information. And again, this, this,
this fuels this kind of intensification of, of research
by social scientists and experts across lots of different
fields, trying to get a kind of scientific purchase
on this problem, which is viewed as a sort
of great societal danger. And again, I wanna sort
of stress. It's not as if the, the study
of misinformation begins in 2016, you know, in a
broad sense, there's always been this systematic investigation into
the sources of human error and fallibility and even
research that explicitly uses terms like misinformation, you know,
that predates 2016. But it's very well documented that
around 2016, you get this explosion of research, like
a dramatic increase in the number of scientific publications
with misinformation in the title and the abstract. And
a lot of that research that sort of falls
within that post 2016 um phenomenon, that's for the
most part the sort of target of, of many
of my critiques.
And what are the main claims made by people
who study misinformation when trying to justify the importance
of it?
I mean, I think the the overarching one is
that misinformation is widespread. Um, IT'S incredibly dangerous, so
it's viewed as a, a driving force, um, underlying
a whole range of things that people are worried
about, you know, things like declining trust in institutions,
support for, for demagogues, attacks on democratic institutions, um,
more generally, kind of anti-science or non-scientific beliefs that
you find among members of the general public. So
it's viewed as this sort of dangerous force, which
is, is shaping many of these um attitudes and
behaviors that, that many people are worried about. But
at the same time, I also think there's an
assumption, sometimes it's implicit, this assumption. Very often actually,
it's sort of stated in the opening paragraph of
articles within misinformation research, which is that not only
is misinformation prevalent and really dangerous, really impactful. But
it's also much more dangerous now, or at least
much more um um prevalent now than it was
in the past. So this is why you often
see references to the idea that we're experiencing a
crisis of misinformation or we're going through a kind
of misinformation age or disinformation age, or post-truth era,
or era of conspiracy theories, the age of conspiracy
theories and so on. And that's part of what
explains, I think, this sort of intensification of research
on this focus on misinformation. This idea that not
only is it this great societal threat, but in
some sense, the, the magnitude and the dangers associated
with that threat have increased dramatically recently.
But what is misinformation exactly? Is the definition like
demonstrably false information good enough?
Well, that's the million dollar question, I guess. Um,
WHAT is misinformation? And of course it's like a
foundational question for a field. If the aim is
to establish more scientific generalizations about misinformation, about its
characteristics, about its prevalence, about different groups susceptibility to
it, you'd better be able to say exactly what
misinformation is, how do we define, measure, operationalize the,
the, the concept. And what you find is, like
this is a buzzword that gets used in lots
of different ways, often in confused and inconsistent ways,
not just in the sort of popular discourse from
journalists and commentators and so on, but also honestly
within lots of the scientific research as well. Um,
IF you're focusing on something like demonstrably false information,
which is a definition you often sort of find
within this literature, you'll you'll also find terms like
sort of unambiguously false information. Um, THERE are sort
of two different ways in which you could look
at that kind of definition. The first question you
could ask is, does it pick out the appropriate
class of information that researchers are interested in? So
in other words, is demonstrably false information, is that
the kind of information which is leading members of
the public to, to embrace misperceptions and make bad
decisions and so on and so forth? That's one
kind of question, what is misinformation? How should we
define the concept? But then there's another kind of
question you can ask as well, which is just
for any given definition, like for example, demonstrably false
information. Is it the case that in applying that
definition, in sort of determining which information satisfies that
definition, misinformation researchers are in an objective position to
apply the concept, that they're going to be able
to apply the concept, sort of with a high
degree of reliability and impartiality. I think if you
focus on a concept like demonstrably false information. There's
a question there about um what that even means.
Um, GENERALLY the idea is if you're focusing on
demonstrably false or unambiguously false information, you're kind of
acknowledging that there's lots of disagreement about what's true
and false in politics. There's gonna be significant uncertainty,
um, misinformation researchers are not claiming to be sort
of universal arbiters of truth. But there are some
clear cut cases where either news media or a
pundit or a commentator makes a claim, engages in
a kind of communication, where we can be highly
certain that the relevant claim or the relevant contribution
to discourse is mistaken. So a sort of canonical
example of that kind of information would be something
like fake news. Like if a disreputable news outlet
just makes something up, you know, the, the, the
Pope endorses Donald Trump for president. Classic 2016 viral
fake news story. Um, THAT'S a case of sort
of demonstrably false information. It's not like that's somebody's
opinion, which might be legitimate, it's just mistaken. Or
you might think of an opinion which directly contradicts
the sort of consensus judgments of experts. So if
somebody opines that vaccines cause autism, or they make
the claim that um human activity has no impact
upon climate change. Um, THOSE sorts of claims are
not just taken to be mistaken by some people,
they're supposed to be sort of demonstrably false, unambiguously
mistaken. Now there are sort of questions you could
ask about that, um, as a definition, like who
qualifies as an expert? Like what degree of expert
consensus is really necessary for, for something to qualify
as demonstrably false if it um contradicts that expert
consensus. But nevertheless, in terms of achieving a definition
where it's kind of plausible that it's gonna be
pretty objective, what satisfies that definition, that, that sort
of definition does, does quite well. The problem is,
it doesn't seem to do very well in terms
of identifying the kind of misinformation that misinformation researchers
are interested in, insofar as they're interested in the
sort of drivers of popular misperceptions in society. And,
and one reason for that is you can have
information which is demonstrably false, which is not misleading
at all. You can think of irony, you can
think of satire. You can even think of, you
know, idealized assumptions within science, which are often known
to be false, but it'd be weird to think
that they're misleading. Um, BUT even much more problematically
than that, most of the misleading communication that you
tend to find isn't really demonstrably false communication, right?
There are many, many ways in which propaganda campaigns
in which pundits and which commentators and so on
can and do mislead audiences that really have nothing
to do with publishing demonstrably false information. So it
has this nice characteristic, which is that. If you're
focusing on demonstrably false information, it's kind of plausible
that you're gonna achieve quite a high degree of
scientific objectivity. But on the other hand, it seems
like you're gonna miss most of the sort of
misleading communication that really shapes lots of pernicious attitudes
and behaviors within society.
And if we're talking about the most probably false
information specifically, how common is it for people to
encounter such kind of misinformation?
It's a really difficult question, um, because for any
of these things, obviously it's gonna slightly depend on
how you unpack this concept of, of demonstrably false
information. And just by the very nature of the
project, there's gonna be sort of measurement uncertainty and
and measurement error. Um, BUT if you're focusing on
something like fake news, where there is quite a
lot of research, so disreputable websites publishing fabricated news
stories, the overwhelming consensus in the scientific literature is
that that kind of content does not seem to
be very prevalent. In most people's information diets, at
least within Western democracies, where there's been lots of
research. So for example, there's a study in um
uh Science from 2020, published by Jennifer Allen and
colleagues, and they estimate that fake news makes up
roughly 0.15% of America's overall media diet. And I
think part of the reason for that is, you
know, most people don't pay much attention to politics,
current affairs, and news at all, let alone fake
news. But among those people that, that sort of
do tune in to, to news media, um, and
pay attention to current affairs, they overwhelmingly tune in
to mainstream media organizations. Now those organizations might be
churning out content which is selective and biased and
misleading and propagandistic in all sorts of different ways,
but it's very, very rare for those sorts of
organizations to publish outright fake news. And in a
way, the, the sort of low prevalence of, of
fake news within the information ecosystem shouldn't really be
that surprising. Not just because on the demand side,
among audiences, you know, people generally want accurate, reliable
information and so organizations emerge to kind of satisfy
that demand. But also because even if you're focusing
on explicit propaganda campaigns, sort of self-conscious attempts to
manipulate public opinion. It's very rare that publishing fake
news is necessary for achieving your goal. Like there
are countless ways in which you can manipulate, deceive,
distort audience opinions without making anything up. So if
you focus, for example, on a campaign to demonize
immigrants, let's say, one thing you could do as
part of that campaign is just to publish outright
fake news. And of course that does happen to
some significant degree. But another thing you can do
is just whenever there's a story of an immigrant
behaving in a negative way, let's say, you just
publish and amplify that story as widely as you
can. And the cumulative effect of that kind of
highly selective reporting is to greatly exaggerate the negative
perception of immigrants in the relevant country. You haven't
published anything, strictly speaking false, but because of this
biased revelation, because you're selecting and amplifying that kind
of content, you end up pushing a particular kind
of narrative. So it's very rare that even for
the most propagandistic deceptive outlets, you need to publish
fake news in order to push a particular. Um,
AGENDA or to manipulate public opinion. Um, BUT also
of all of the ways that you can try
to manipulate audiences, publishing outright fake news is the
most hazardous way of doing it. Because if you
make something up as a news organization, first of
all, it's very likely that audiences will find that
out, partly because it's a competitive media ecosystem and
it's always in the interest of your competitors to
discredit you, if you're a news outlet, for example.
Um, SO there are always these incentives to sort
of call out when another, um, a media outlet
makes something up. Um, SO it's, it's very likely
that audiences will discover that you've published the fake
news, and if they do, that's gonna really hurt
your reputation, right, that's gonna result in this just
collapsing trust in you as a source. Whereas if
you publish something that's true but misleading, it's much
more difficult for you to be called out on
that or to enforce norms against that, because you've
always got the kind of cover story which is,
well, we published something that was true. You know,
surely you can't be angry about us publishing something
that was strictly speaking, accurate. So in a way,
the empirical research I think shows that this kind
of clear cut fake news is not that prevalent.
And I think if you step back and you
reflect on even the sort of most obvious, most
deliberate propaganda campaigns, shouldn't really surprise us that that
kind of content is not that common.
And you say that this kind of misinformation uh
is largely symptomatic of other problems. What other problems
are you referring to exactly?
So I think the the concept of it being
symptomatic there is supposed to sort of push back
against this idea, which I think many people have
and which underlies lots of the sort of discourse
and the research on this topic, where, you know,
misinformation is viewed as a kind of exogenous force
that comes into society and it drives people to
embrace false and inaccurate beliefs and make bad decisions
about the world. And that can happen, but I
think especially when you're focusing on this really kind
of clear cut, unambiguous fals and fabrications, what the
research tends to show is not only is sort
of average exposure to that content pretty low, but
the average exposure is pretty misleading in the sense
that most people don't really encounter much of that
content at all. But there's a narrow fringe of
social media users that encounters quite a lot of
it, and that increases the, the overall average. And
that fringe of the, the sort of social media
users that engages with lots of this content online
is not a cross section of the population. It's
not, and this again is a sort of popular
image many people have, a situation where, you know,
otherwise ordinary people with sort of basic ordinary beliefs,
um, fall down a rabbit hole and now they're
a queue and non-believer. What tends to happen is
you've got people with pre-existing attitudes, identities, worldviews, beliefs
and so on. Engaging with and seeking out content
that aligns with that general perspective on the world.
And in many cases, at least as some sort
of um almost sort of ethnographic and qualitative research
which suggests this, the engagement with that really kind
of absurd fake news is not even for reasons
of belief, it's just being spread and amplified for
things like trolling, for satire, for sowing chaos in
society and so on. Um, BUT even when it
is engaged with by people who take it seriously,
that's often symptomatic of the fact that these are
segments of the population which don't trust institutions. They
might actively distrust mainstream knowledge generating institutions like public
health authorities, mainstream media, um, scientific consensus and so
on. And so they're seeking out counter establishment content,
or they've got, for example, a very general kind
of conspiratorial worldview. And so they're seeking out content
that affirms and rationalizes that kind of worldview. Or
another thing you find is, if you've got highly
polarized contexts where you've got some people who are
strongly politically engaged and highly partisan, so they're interested
in seeking out content that sort of demonizes the
other side, often in a very hyperbolic manner, they
will also tend to have lower standards in terms
of the content that they engage with. They'll seek
out sort of really hyper partisan, really biased content.
So that's the sense in which it's symptomatic that
it's not a matter of, you know, otherwise ordinary
people with average beliefs being sucked into rabbit holes
and then engaging with this content. The research on
this topic overwhelmingly suggests that you've got people with
preexisting kind of attitudes, beliefs, worldviews, engaging with and
seeking out this content because it aligns with those
pre-existing beliefs. Crucially, that doesn't mean that it has
no harmful consequences. That would be clearly absurd as
a claim. The mere fact that it's responsive to
and sort of reinforces these pre-existing beliefs, that's consistent
with it sometimes having some negative consequences. So for
example, sometimes this kind of content will be used
to mobilize different parts of the community around a
shared narrative. Um, AND it can also serve to
sort of entrench people in, in, in these worldviews,
these sort of pre-existing beliefs that they bring to
social media. So it's not to claim that it
has no harmful consequences at all. But rather the
point is, if you're trying to deal with some
of these really deep rooted issues in society, deep-rooted
epistemic issues of people having these highly conspiratorial worldviews,
not trusting institutions, seeking out content that sort of
demonizes members of the other side, you're not gonna
get very far if you're just focusing on that
misinformation. That misinformation exists for the most part because
of these underlying kind of attitudes, worldviews, identities and
so on.
Would you classify the preoccupation with misinformation as a
moral panic? And if so, why?
Um, SO I know you've had Sasha Altay on
the, on the podcast before who also sort of
talks in this, in this kind of way. Um,
AND he's also one of the most sort of
astute and sophisticated, um, theorists when it comes to
focusing on misinformation as a symptom of these sort
of underlying problems. And he wasn't the first person
to, to use this sort of moral panic framing,
you find it among, you know, media researchers and
so on. Um, WHAT I would say is, whether
you want to use the term moral panic or
not, when it comes to this really sort of
clear cut, unambiguous, fake news that you find online,
published by disreputable news outlets, um, there really does
seem to be a case where the amount of
attention. The amount of panic, the alarmism surrounding that
phenomenon is not warranted by the evidence we have
concerning its prevalence and its impact. So in that
respect, in the sense that there is a lot
of focus on this, a lot of attention on
this, a lot of panic surrounding this, I would
say that um at the very least what you
can say is it doesn't seem to be supported
by evidence concerning the, the scale and impact of
the problem. I would also say another thing that
I think the, the moral panic framing gets right
is that it's not just that all of this
concern with and alarm about misinformation exaggerates the the
prevalence and impact of that kind of misinformation. There's
also this broader idea, which I alluded to at
the beginning, which is that many people think this
problem of misinformation. In a broader sense of people
believing wrong things, endorsing conspiracy theories, being ignorant, holding
misperceptions, having anti-establishment worldviews, etc. ETC. There's this idea
that this is much, much worse than it used
to be. And again, that's another case where I
think there simply isn't good evidence. To the effect
that that's true, there simply isn't good evidence that
across the board there's been this overwhelming deterioration in
the kind of quality of the broader informational ecosystem.
And inasmuch as lots of misinformation, commentary, and indeed
lots of misinformation research, embodies the assumption that we're
now living through a misinformation age, or a disinformation
age or a post-truth era, in contrast with some
allegedly previous era of, you know, greater truth and
objectivity, that I think is also very, very misguided.
And so I think insofar as the moral panic
framing captures the fact that that's misguided, I think
it's also got something to it there as well.
So you have been accused of endorsing a weird
postmodernist view where there are no differences in the
reliability, honesty, and objectivity of different outlets, institutions, and
communicators. What is your reply?
Yeah, I've also been accused of endorsing 100% postmodernism,
um, I mean, maybe it's like good to, to
step back a little bit and give the context
for where that, that accusation uh arose, which is
that. In my view, misinformation research, if it focuses
on the really kind of clear cut unambiguous falsehoods
that we've just been talking about, even though I
think that content doesn't tend to be particularly widespread,
it doesn't tend to be that impactful. Um, NEVERTHELESS,
I think if misinformation research restricts its focus to
that kind of content. It can achieve a pretty
high degree of objectivity. Um, Now, in response to
the fact that that kind of content isn't particularly
widespread, and it doesn't appear to be all that
impactful, there's been this real move from those who
study misinformation and those who focus on it, to
say that we should really kind of broaden the
definition of misinformation so that it focuses not just
on demonstrably false information, and maybe not even just
on false information, but on any kind of information
that is misleading. Clearly, if you broaden the definition
of misinformation in that way, it's trivially true that
misinformation is so understood, it's gonna be much more
widespread. Um, AND I think it's also trivially true
that that kind of content, if you're focusing on
misleading content in this really kind of general and
broad sense, is much more impactful than clear cut,
you know, fake news or unambiguous falsehoods. You know,
partly because it's not in any way restricted to
disreputable websites online, you know, misleading communication in the
broadest possible sense, I would say is absolutely pervasive
within the informational ecosystem. Um, SO again, to, to
cite a study by Jennifer Allen which came out
um earlier this year, which looked at vaccine content
on Facebook. And there, the sort of the, the
headline result of this study is, if you focus
on just outright fake news about vaccines, what you
tend to find is that content existed on Facebook,
but it wasn't that prevalent and it wasn't that
impactful. But if you focus on content that's not
fake news, it's not strictly speaking false, but it's
nevertheless vaccine skeptical in its sort of general implications.
So for example, true reports of rare vaccine related
deaths. That content, I think they estimate it as
about 46 times more impactful than fake news. And
that's just one example, but you can also think
of things like partisan media, in a very well
documented and very obvious feature of partisan news media
like Fox News or MSNBC or GB News in
the UK. That even though they very rarely just
make stuff up, they tend to select, emit, frame,
package, interpret information in ways that are highly misleading,
that sort of support a particular kind of partisan
narrative. So clearly that kind of broader misleading communication
is very widespread. But in my view, I think
if you understand misinformation as a term that broadly,
it really is not suitable for objective, scientific study,
classification and generalization. And you know, part of the
reason is, it's not just that misleading information so
defined is widespread. It's sort of so widespread that
the concept loses any analytical value. Even if you
focus on sort of mainstream news media and you
set aside all worries about sort of ideological and
political biases. Even high quality outlets like the BBC,
The New York Times, the Financial Times, and so
on. They report, because they're news media, a highly
non-random sample of all of the bad, threatening things
happening in the world. Like, if it bleeds it
leads, is quite literally the recipe underlying lots of
news reporting, and also a mechanism of cherry picking.
And as a result of that, the, the audience
of news media, mainstream news media, tends to have
a very negative understanding of the world. Whenever a
trend is going in the right direction, the audience
of these sort of establishment, news media. Um, ORGANIZATIONS
tend to have a misperception about that. They think
it's going either in the wrong direction or they
just generally have a pretty catastrophising understanding of the
world. Does that mean that all of news media
would qualify as misinformation? I think that's a little
bit peculiar as um a definition. Um, BUT I
also think it's just incredibly difficult to even say
an abstract what makes information misleading. Like to really
give a precise understanding of why it is that
certain kind of reporting qualifies as misleading and other
kind of reporting doesn't. So misinformation researchers want to
say, if you report on rare vaccine related deaths,
even if you accurately report on them. That's misinformation
because it might mislead audiences into thinking those sorts
of events are more prevalent than they are. But
if you try to apply that principle consistently, you
get into incredibly weird places. For example, take reporting
of rare police shootings of unarmed black citizens in
the US. I would say that's very important reporting,
but statistically speaking, you're reporting on rare events, and
there's some evidence that people in society greatly overestimate
how prevalent that those sorts of occurrences are. Um,
DOES that mean that that kind of reporting is
gonna get classified as misinformation? You end up in
really weird places here. And I think part of
the reason is, once you start with this really
expansive definition of misinformation, it's very difficult to see
how judgments are gonna be anything other than judgment
calls on the basis of your worldview, your ideology,
your values, your interests. And they're gonna be very
context sensitive, and they're not gonna lend themselves to
these sorts of precise scientific generalizations about, you know,
certain people being more or less susceptible to misinformation
or misinformation constituting X% of the informational ecosystem. Now
it's because I've made that kind of argument, which
I've made in much more depth elsewhere, um, that.
The reaction from certain misinformation researchers has been, well,
I must endorse some sort of weird postmodernist rejection
of the very idea of truth or, or rationality
or knowledge or objectivity. But of course, I don't
endorse that kind of strange view where there's no
such thing as reality. It's rather that I think
reality is complex, uh access to reality is often
highly mediated by which information we encounter from others,
how we interpret that information. Human beings tend to
be biased, you know, experts don't tend to fully
escape those biases, etc. ETC. And for all of
those reasons, it's not like I think. There's no
such thing as objectivity. I just think objectivity is
incredibly difficult to achieve when it comes to politics,
and it becomes much, much more difficult to achieve
the more expansive the definition of misinformation is.
But should people still call out misleading content when
they encounter it, and who should do it? Do
you think it should be done by misinformation experts,
for example?
I mean, I think it depends on what capacity,
but I think it's, it's a really important question
because there is a fundamental distinction between democratic citizens,
and that could be either one of us, you
know, you've got a podcast, I've got a blog,
um, it could be any pundit, any commentator, any
member of a democracy who wants to participate in
the public sphere. There's a fundamental difference between the
activity of democratic citizens within the public sphere, making
judgments about what they take to be true, calling
out ideas, reporting claims that they judge to be
misleading or quote unquote, misinformation, although most ordinary citizens
don't really use that kind of jargon. There's a
fundamental distinction between that project, which of course is
incredibly important, and that's why we've got a democracy,
and that's why we've got a public sphere. Because
we recognize the truth is incredibly challenging to obtain
and there's gonna be a diversity of perspectives, and
you need that argument, and you need that deliberation,
and you need that space where people can make
mistakes and put forward different kinds of ideas. There's
a difference between that project and a project of
a certain kind of technocratic expert class, attempting to
establish scientific generalizations about misinformation. From an allegedly neutral
objective vantage point. For the purpose of publishing these
findings in scientific journals, and then either directly or
indirectly informing policy responses to what's studied within that,
that research. Those are two fundamentally different projects, and
it's reasonable to hold the latter project to much
higher standards than we would hold the former project.
If you're just an ordinary citizen and you might
be a misinformation researcher participating in political debate as
an ordinary citizen, in which case obviously it's fine.
That's one thing, and we recognize human beings are
biased and we're fallible, and we're often groupish, and
we've got allegiances and our judgment can be biased
by self-interest, etc. ETC. That's one thing. It's totally
different when we're thinking of an allegedly objective, scientific
project. And we should have completely different standards and
much higher standards when it comes to that project
than we do when it comes to ordinary democratic
debate and deliberation.
So, in 2024, this interview will come out in
2025. The World Economic Forum published its global risk
report and misinformation and disinformation came out as the
top global threats over the next two years. So,
Uh, uh, I have of things like, for example,
extreme weather events, societal polarization, cyber insecurity, interstate armed
conflict, lack of economic opportunity, inflation, involuntary migration, economic
downturn and pollution.
Uh,
WHAT do you make of this?
Um, I think it's really indicative of this more
general. Panic and alarmism about misinformation. Um Part of
the issue here though, I think, is it really
again depends on what's meant by the term misinformation
and disinformation. And I think the problem with this
sort of report where misinformation and disinformation is placed
as a more severe threat, more severe risk than
nuclear war or economic catastrophe, and so on and
so forth. Um, THE problem is, if you're understanding
these terms very, very narrowly. And that's gonna include
things like fake news, but it's also gonna include
things like, you know, unambiguously false opinions. And it's
also gonna include things like deep fake technology, you
know, the use of artificial intelligence, generative AI to
create these sort of hyper realistic audio and video
recordings, cos I think that was in the background
when this report was published. Um, THAT kind of
content. As we've already discussed, doesn't appear to be
that prevalent and doesn't appear to be that impactful.
So I think if you're focusing on that really
kind of discrete phenomenon of clear cut, unambiguous forces
and fabrications, it's not to say that it's not
a problem at all, for the reasons I've already
discussed, I think that can sometimes and and it
does sometimes have harmful consequences. To me, it's just
absurd to suggest that's a, a more severe risk
than the other things that are listed within that
risk report. Now one of the responses to that,
which mirrors this more general response to the discovery
that really clear cut misinformation doesn't appear to be
that widespread or impactful, is to say, well, maybe
we should understand misinformation and disinformation. To refer to,
you know, any factors which end up distorting human
judgment and leading to bad decision making within society,
because of course, for all of those other risks,
whether it's military conflict, nuclear war, you know, all
of these other things. Clearly bad decision making, human
error, fallibility and so on, are playing an important
role within them. So why don't we just subsume
all of those factors which cause human error and
fallibility under this general term misinformation and disinformation, and
then we can say misinformation and disinformation are the
most significant risk inasmuch as they're implicated in all
of these other risks. But I think one problem
with that is, it doesn't really make any analytical
sense to bundle together all of the different sources
of human error and fallibility as misinformation and disinformation.
You're dealing with a vast complex, heterogeneous set of
factors which can distort human judgment. That's gonna include
human ignorance, human self-interest, self deception, tribalism, etc. Um,
IT'S not analytically helpful, I think, to, to bundle
all of those very different things together under this
sort of general label, misinformation and disinformation. But also,
there's absolutely no reason to think, if you're just
focusing on the sources of human error, that this
is a discrete near term threat. Those sources have
always been features of the human condition. They almost
certainly always will be features of the human condition.
So it's very confused, I think, to sort of,
within the next two years, single those out as
the most significant risk that humanity confronts. So I
think there's a sort of issue here where it's
either wrong if you focus on a really discreet
phenomenon, which is this sort of clear cut unambiguous
forces and fabrications, or it's just so confused, it's
not even wrong. It's just an incredibly unhelpful way
of framing. What is a genuine problem, which is
human error and fallibility, but of course that's always
been a problem, there's nothing new about that as
as a problem.
And how about AI based this information? Do you
think it is a legitimate threat or not?
I think it's a legitimate threat. Um, I think
it's a good thing that lots of people are,
are working on it and worrying about it and,
and thinking about ways to guard against the sort
of the, the negative, potentially negative consequences of artificial
intelligence and and how it sort of shapes and,
and impacts upon uh the public sphere and the
information ecosystem. I mean, I would say there was
all of this alarmism about the impact of deep
fakes, especially, but not exclusively, um, in terms of
the elections of 2024. That includes the election in
the United Kingdom, it also includes the US election
and many, many other elections around the world. And
it really seems to have been the case that
deep fake technology did not play a significant role
in terms of shifting vote share in these elections.
And I think the reason for that is very
easy to see, based on these sort of more
general things we've discussed in the context of thinking
about misinformation and disinformation. You know, clear cut misinformation
like deep fakes fall into that general category, in
general, isn't particularly widespread or impactful for the reasons
that we've discussed. So it's unclear why something like
deepfake technology would have really had a big impact
there. And then more generally, there's something which we
haven't really touched on, but is in the background
of this conversation, which is just that human beings
are really difficult to influence. When it comes to
things like voting intentions, when it comes to things
like our political allegiances, our basic intuitions, our basic
worldview. Incredibly difficult to manipulate people into holding false
beliefs that contradict their pre-existing ideas and attitudes. And
that's because of work that's, or, or rather, the
reasons for that are reflected in work by people
like Dan Sperber and Hugo Mercier that you've obviously
had on the podcast before on epistemic vigilance. You
know, it it wouldn't have made sense for human
beings to have evolved to be gullible. Instead, we've
evolved a whole set of both cognitive defenses against
manipulation and misinformation. And also we developed sort of
social and institutional mechanisms to guard against those things
as well. Um, AND so, given that, a lot
of the alarmism about AI based disinformation didn't really
take that into consideration. It it reflected this kind
of view that many people have, which is that
people, and it's always other people. ARE gullible, they're
credulous. They're sort of easy to manipulate by content
that turns up in their social media feed. And
that's just not true, and it, it's not even
true when it comes to really um intense sort
of propaganda and advertising campaigns, which have a lot
of funding behind them. So it's certainly not going
to be true when it comes to, you know,
relatively low quality um attempts to, to manipulate the
information ecosystem with, with AI. And then there's a
final thing which is just that any discussion about
AI based disinformation. Insofar as it treats that as
this really great societal threat, has to explain why
it is that these advances, these sort of developments
in AI are going to asymmetrically benefit bad information
over good information. Because if not, then it just
seems like any consequences it might have in terms
of the spread of bad information are gonna be
mirrored or even outweighed by the benefits that it's
gonna have when it comes to good information. And
certainly if I think about my own work, both
my sort of published academic research, but also in
terms of trying to make like evidence-based contributions to
public debate on certain issues, I can't think of
a single way in which it's been negatively impacted
by AI and I think it's been benefited in
many, many ways by advances in generative AI. And
I suspect that's true of many people throughout society.
Um, ACADEMICS, journalists, um, pundits, commentators who are trying
to make sort of good faith, evidence-based contributions to
public discourse. So even when it is potentially true
that that artificial intelligence might benefit those people who
are deliberately trying to spread bad information, it's also,
for similar reasons gonna benefit people who are trying
to make good faith, evidence-based contributions to public discourse
as well. And I haven't really seen any reason
to think that it's gonna asymmetrically benefit those bad
actors over the good actors.
So, how do you think we should deal with
misinformation and disinformation then if at least sometimes they
can be harmful?
I mean, I think it's an incredibly difficult question,
and I wouldn't claim to have a particularly good
thoughtful answer to it. I think it's helpful to
distinguish between what we can do as individuals and
what we might try and do at the kind
of broader social, political, institutional level. Um, I would
say as individuals who are participating in the public
sphere and engaging in democratic debate and deliberation and
so on. There I think what's really important is
things like, you know, modeling intellectual humility, trying to
cultivate what psychologists call, you know, active, open-mindedness, being
receptive to the possibility that our beliefs and our
contributions to public discourse might be mistaken. Here I
think the research of people like Philip Tetlock on
those characteristics which are conducive to high quality forecasting,
which tend to be characteristics very, very different from
those that prevail in sort of public debate and
deliberation. Things like intellectual humility, this act of open-mindedness,
that's really important. Um, AT the social institutional level,
my sense is the standard response which many people
endorse, which is, if there's bad information, we just
need to censor it, either in terms of hard
censorship or in terms of subtler sort of content
moderation policies. I think that has been, maybe not
a disaster, but an overall negative in terms of
that, that strategy so far. Um, PARTLY because a
lot of that is based on ideas which exaggerate
the impact of this misinformation and disinformation to begin
with. Partly it's because of reasons we've discussed to
do with achieving a high degree of objectivity when
it comes to classifying things like misinformation, because you're
never gonna get infallibility, there are gonna be mistakes.
And if you get censorship wrong and you accidentally
or deliberately, but I think it's normally inadvertent. If
you censor content which is legitimate or reasonable, as
has happened, I think, several times over recent years,
that can create a massive backlash against elites and
establishment institutions. Um, AND more generally, I think it
tends to exacerbate the very things like institutional distrust
and political polarization, which really um cause many of
the issues surrounding misinformation. That people are concerned with,
to begin with. If you know, those people who
distrust establishment institutions, they view these institutions as clamping
down on dissent from establishment narratives, that's likely to
aggravate the distrust, which is driving them towards counter
establishment and often misinformative content to begin with. So
I don't think censorship is the answer, um, either
in terms of hard censorship or for the most
part in terms of subtle sort of subtler forms
of censorship, like, like content moderation. I think the
most important thing ultimately is. In complex societies like
the ones we inhabit today, we do depend upon
experts, and we depend upon well functioning institutions, norms
of professional journalism within media, we depend upon effective
public health authorities, we depend upon scientific research and
so on and so forth. And a large part
of trying to build trust in those institutions, which
is absolutely essential, I think it's just trying to
make those institutions more trustworthy, to trying to invest
in making sure that they're not overly politicized, that
there's a significant diversity of perspectives within them. To
make sure that all of the sorts of factors
that drive things like the replication crisis or the
excessive communication of certainty that you often get from
public health authorities and so on, to make sure
that that stuff gets sort of stamped out. So
building institutional trust by I think making these institutions
more trustworthy is really important. And then I definitely
do think there is a place for, you know,
public information campaigns, you know, in cases where. We
can have a high degree of confidence that a
certain position is true. So for example, on vaccines.
I think it really is important to try to
um disseminate that research, disseminate those ideas with the
goal of trying to persuade audiences, because I think
even though people aren't gullible, even though they're not
easy to influence, they are still rational and people
do respond to persuasion. So I think those sorts
of public information campaigns are really important, but I
think in and of themselves, without addressing these other
sorts of issues like institutional distrust and and intense
political polarization and sectarianism and so on, I don't
think on their own they're gonna get that far.
So one last question then, earlier we talked about
misinformation experts. How about fact checkers themselves? Can we
trust them because at least they seem to have
a good track record, right?
Um, I mean, it's difficult to know whether they've
got a good track record, I guess. There there's
always this sort of deep methodological issue of how
you evaluate the reliability of fact checkers. The really
annoying slogan, who fact checks the fact checkers, um,
gets to something important, which is, it's really difficult
to systematically evaluate the degree to which fact checkers
claims correspond to reality, because if you were in
a position to do that, you wouldn't need the
fact checkers to begin with. Typically the way in
which their reliability gets evaluated is not by checking
for correspondence, but, but by checking for agreement between
different fact-checking organizations. And when you do that, you
do tend to find that there's a fairly high
degree of agreement between different fact-checking organizations, especially when
it comes to highly confident judgments, for example, a
news story is false or that a news story
is, is true. And I think that's, you know,
relatively compelling evidence that for the most part, on
many issues, they are quite reliable, although of course
you might be able to tell a story where
the explanation of that agreement is not correspondence, it's
some other sorts of factors. But I think at
least when it comes to these sort of factual
matters, my own view is they do tend to
be fairly reliable. It's just that I think there's
only so much that fact checking, whether it's internal
to the news reporting of organizations, because of course,
lots of people don't know this, but if you
publish something through the BBC or The New York
Times, it goes through an extensive internal fact-checking procedure,
or in terms of these external sort of fact-checking
organizations, which fact check the, the reporting of other
news media. Um, THERE'S only so much I think
that that kind of work can achieve. So I
think. You know, there's good reason to believe, for
reasons I mentioned in terms of the importance of
public information campaigns, that that can have positive consequences.
At least if, you know, the fact checking industry
is not viewed as overly partisan. Unfortunately in some
countries it is for complex reasons. But I, I,
I do think it can have positive consequences, but.
Precisely because many of these epistemic issues of people
endorsing conspiracy theories, misperceptions, institutional distrust, and so on,
because they're very deep rooted in society, there's only
so much I think that you're gonna be able
to achieve with fact checking. Um, SO it's, I,
I don't want to be completely dismissive of it,
I think. Overall, I would say my own sense
is that they tend to be pretty reliable and
have positive consequences, although I think it's difficult to
establish that with certainty. Um, BUT just as we
shouldn't be sort of dismissive, I also think there's
a lot of faith which is put into the
idea that if you just show people the facts,
that's gonna be a magic cure for many of
these sort of epistemological problems in society. And I
think if you really understand what's driving these problems,
it becomes clear pretty quickly that that's unlikely to
make that much difference.
Great, so just before we go, where can people
find you when you work on the internet?
I have a blog, Conspicuous cognition, so you can
just search that. um, YOU can also just put
in Dan Williams' philosophy into Google and if you
do that, you can go to my website and
you'll find a list of my published research.
Great. So, Doctor Williams, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show again.
It's always a pleasure to talk with you. Thanks,
Ricardo. Cheers.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then themetri Robert
Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael Stormir,
Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal Herzognun Macha
Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearauujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poultonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow
atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers. These are Webb,
Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon,
Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian
Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.